Add a dPCR section to diagnostics. (#206)
greenelab/covid19-review: content/10.diagnostics.md

Considering that no other sarbecoviruses are currently known to infect humans, a positive test indicates that the patient is infected with SARS-CoV-2.
However, this test is not able to discriminate the genetics of viruses within the sarbecovirus clade.

##### dPCR

> Digital PCR (dPCR) is a new generation of PCR technologies where a sample is partitioned into thousands of compartments, such as nanodroplets or nanowells, and a PCR reaction takes place in each compartment.

Author: Perhaps `In dPCR, a sample is partitioned into thousands of compartments, such as nanodroplets (droplet dPCR or ddPCR) or nanowells, and a PCR reaction takes place in each compartment.`?

> Digital PCR (dPCR) is a new generation of PCR technologies where a sample is partitioned into thousands of compartments, such as nanodroplets or nanowells, and a PCR reaction takes place in each compartment.

Reviewer: That sounds great to me!

This leads to a digital read-out where each partition is either positive or negative for the nucleic acid being tested for.

> While dPCR equipment is not as common yet as that for RT-PCR, dPCR generally has higher sensitivity than can be achieved with other PCR technologies, while maintaining high specificity [@doi:10.3390/s18041271].

Reviewer 2: I totally agree with @rando2, it's better to be specific. ddPCR lower detection limit is 500 times lower than the RT-PCR used in current tests. Apologies if you already fixed it (the version I have read did not have info on detection limits).

> While dPCR equipment is not as common yet as that for RT-PCR, dPCR generally has higher sensitivity than can be achieved with other PCR technologies, while maintaining high specificity [@doi:10.3390/s18041271].

Reviewer: moved to #333

In a second study, Dong et al. [@doi:10.1101/2020.03.14.20036129] compared qRT-PCR and ddPCR on 194 samples, including 103 samples from suspected patients, 75 from contacts and close contacts, and 16 from suspected convalescents.
Of the 103 suspected patient samples, 29 were reported as positive, 25 as negative, and 49 as suspected by qRT-PCR; all patients were later confirmed to be SARS-CoV-2 positive.
Among qRT-PCR negative or suspected samples, in total 61 samples (17 negative and 44 suspected) were later confirmed to be positive by ddPCR, improving the overall detection rate among these patients from 28.2% to 87.4%.
Of 75 patient samples from contacts and close contacts, 48 were tested negative with both methods and patients indeed remained healthy.
Within the remaining 27 patient samples, 10 tested positive, 1 negative, 16 suspect by qRT-PCR.
15 out of 16 suspect samples and the negative test result were overturned by ddPCR, decreasing the rate of suspect cases from 21% to 1%.

> Importantly, all samples tested positive using qRT-PCR were also tested positive using ddPCR.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Among the 16 convalescent patients, qRT-PCR identified 12 as positive, 3 as suspect, and 1 as negative, but RT-dPCR identified all 16 as positive.
This evidence further indicates that the lower limit of detection made possible by ddPCR may be useful for identifying when COVID-19 patients are cleared of the virus.
Importantly, all samples tested positive using qRT-PCR were also tested positive using ddPCR.
```
Is it worth it to mention what happened to these samples? I thought it might be worth including, so I put together a brief explanation.

Author: What I try to say here is that all samples across the study that were positive by qRT-PCR were also verified as positive using dPCR; in contrast to the other study where only qRT-PCR negative samples were tested. I'll reword.

Reviewer 2: Dear @cbrueffer,

If I can make a comment I would be a bit more specific on the experimental set up used to screen patients, i.e. genes that they used to screen patients (N, ORF1ab and E) and genes that give more sensitivity compared to others (it looks like if you use probes against the N gene it works better in reference 71). Also reference 72 ( Dong et al. ) analyse the sensitivity of one step reverse transcription-dPCR compared to RT-qPCR, worth to mention? Also detection limits for RT-dPCR in reference 72 are provided (2 copies/reaction?), worth to mention it as well? See if you and @rando2 think these points are worth to mention.

Best regards

Author: Thanks for the comments @aadattoli ! I'll work on incorporating your and @rando2's feedback; I've been busy was other work the last few days so please excuse the slow pace.

Reviewer: > Thanks for the comments @aadattoli ! I'll work on incorporating your and @rando2's feedback; I've been busy was other work the last few days so please excuse the slow pace.

Hi @cbrueffer just tag me when this is done and I'll review one last time and merge :) I think it's a great section!

Reviewer: moved to #333

> Overall these studies suggest that dPCR is a promising tool to overcome the problem of false negative tests in SARS-CoV-2 detection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Overall these studies suggest that dPCR is a promising tool for overcoming the problem of false negative tests in SARS-CoV-2 detection.
```
Perhaps mention difference in limits of detection as well?

Author: Good point; maybe we should mention that in the qPCR and qRT-PCR sections well.

In a second study, Dong et al. [@doi:10.1101/2020.03.14.20036129] compared the results of qRT-PCR and ddPCR testing for SARS-CoV-2 in 194 samples, including 103 samples from suspected patients, 75 from contacts and close contacts, and 16 from suspected convalescents.
Of the 103 suspected patient samples, 29 were reported as positive, 25 as negative, and 49 as suspected by qRT-PCR; all patients were later confirmed to be SARS-CoV-2 positive.
Of the qRT-PCR negative or suspected samples, a total of 61 (17 negative and 44 suspected) were later confirmed to be positive by ddPCR, improving the overall detection rate among these patients from 28.2% to 87.4%.
Of 75 patient samples from contacts and close contacts, 48 were tested negative with both methods and patients indeed remained healthy.
Within the remaining 27 patient samples, 10 tested positive, 1 negative, 16 suspect by qRT-PCR.
15 out of 16 suspect samples and the negative test result were overturned by ddPCR, decreasing the rate of suspect cases from 21% to 1%.
Importantly, all samples tested positive using qRT-PCR were also tested positive using ddPCR.

> Overall these studies suggest that dPCR is a promising tool for overcoming the problem of false negative tests in SARS-CoV-2 detection.

Reviewer 3: * "Overall, these studies"
* "false-negative"
* Testing and detection sound repetitive: "the problem of false-negative SARS-CoV-2 testing"

Considering that no other sarbecoviruses are currently known to infect humans, a positive test indicates that the patient is infected with SARS-CoV-2.
However, this test is not able to discriminate the genetics of viruses within the sarbecovirus clade.

##### dPCR

> Digital PCR (dPCR) is a new generation of PCR technologies where a sample is partitioned into thousands of compartments, such as nanodroplets or nanowells, in each of which the PCR reaction takes place in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Digital PCR (dPCR) is a new generation of PCR technologies where a sample is partitioned into thousands of compartments, such as nanodroplets or nanowells, and a PCR reaction takes place in each compartment.
```

This leads to a digital read-out where each partition is either positive or negative for the nucleic acid being tested for.

> While dPCR equipment is not as common as RT-PCR, it generally has higher sensitivity and specificity than can be achieved with other PCR technologies [@doi: 10.3390/s18041271].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While dPCR equipment is not as common as that for RT-PCR, dPCR generally has higher sensitivity and specificity than can be achieved with other PCR technologies [@doi: 10.3390/s18041271].
```

High sensitivity is particularly relevant for SARS-CoV-2 detection, since low viral load in clinical samples can lead to false negatives.

> Suo et al performed a double-blind evaluation of dPCR for SARS-CoV-2 detection on 57 samples--43 samples from suspected positive patients, and 14 from supposed convalescents--that all tested negative for SARS-CoV-2 using RT-PCR.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Suo et al. performed a double-blind evaluation of dPCR for SARS-CoV-2 detection on 57 samples--43 samples from suspected positive patients, and 14 from supposed convalescents--that all tested negative for SARS-CoV-2 using RT-PCR.
```

> In their hands, 33 out of 35 (94.3%) patients later clinically confirmed positive, as well as 9 out of 14 (64.2%) of supposed convalescents tested positive using dPCR [@doi:10.1101/2020.02.29.20029439].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Despite the initial negative results, 33 out of 35 (94.3%) patients and 9 out of 14 (64.2%) supposed convalescents were later clinically confirmed positive.
All of these individuals tested positive using dPCR [@doi:10.1101/2020.02.29.20029439].
```
Is this accurate? I was trying to help make the three methods clearly distinct (originally negative, clinically positive, positive with this test as well).

Author: I think that's correct. The study was double-blind, so the clinical result was only revealed after the dPCR test.

> While not a complete head to head comparison to RT-PCR in all aspects--e.g. no samples testing positive using RT-PCR were evaluated by dPCR--the study shows the potential of dPCR for viral detection in highly diluted samples.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While not a complete head-to-head comparison to RT-PCR in all aspects-- e.g. no samples testing positive using RT-PCR were evaluated by dPCR-- the study shows the potential of dPCR for viral detection in highly diluted samples.
```
My question here is: 2 patients and 6 convalenscents were not clinically confirmed positive and these individuals were also all negative with dPCR? That is worth noting if that's the case!

Author: 2 symptomatic patients tested negative with both RT-PCR and dPCR, but were diagnosed with viral pneumonia by chest CT. 5 of the 14 suspected convalescents indeed tested negative by dPCR. I'll add it to the text.

Considering that no other sarbecoviruses are currently known to infect humans, a positive test indicates that the patient is infected with SARS-CoV-2.
However, this test is not able to discriminate the genetics of viruses within the sarbecovirus clade.

##### dPCR

Digital PCR (dPCR) is a new generation of PCR technologies offering an alternative to traditional real-time quantitative PCR. 
In dPCR, a sample is partitioned into thousands of compartments, such as nanodroplets (droplet dPCR or ddPCR) or nanowells, and a PCR reaction takes place in each compartment.

> This leads to a digital read-out where each partition is either positive or negative for the nucleic acid sequence being tested for.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This leads to a digital read-out where each partition is either positive or negative for the nucleic acid sequence being tested for, allowing for much higher throughput.
```
Offline suggestion from [Diana Byrne](https://www.engr.uky.edu/directory/byrne-diana)
